Squall cnl (#820)
NeuroLang/NeuroLang: doc/tutorial_squall.rst

> SQUALL: Controlled English for NeuroLang

Author: Let's call it NeuroSQUALL

Author: @copilot fix this

========================================

SQUALL (*Semantically controlled Query-Answerable Logical Language*) lets you
write NeuroLang queries and rules in plain English sentences instead of
symbolic Datalog notation.  Under the hood, each sentence is translated to a
NeuroLang logical expression using Montague semantics in
Continuation-Passing Style.

This tutorial walks through every supported construct with runnable examples.
All code blocks below can be executed with ``pytest --doctest-glob=doc/tutorial_squall.rst``.

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Setup
-----

Every example uses the high-level ``NeurolangPDL`` frontend::

    >>> from neurolang.frontend import NeurolangPDL

1. Basic Sentences
------------------

The simplest SQUALL sentence consists of a **subject** (a variable or
literal) and a **verb** (a unary predicate).

Variables are written with a ``?`` prefix.  String literals are enclosed in
single quotes.  The following example checks that a sentence about a named
entity fires as expected::

    >>> nl = NeurolangPDL()
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice",)], name="plays")

>     >>> result = nl.execute_squall_program("obtain every plays.")

Author: this example reads weird as english

    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice",), ("bob",)], name="person")
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("jazz",)], name="genre")
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice", "jazz")], name="sings")
    >>> nl.execute_squall_program(
    ...     "define as Performer every person ?x that a Genre ?y ~sings."
    ... )
    >>> sorted(nl.solve_all()["performer"].as_pandas_dataframe().iloc[:, 0].tolist())
    ['alice']

2. Quantifiers
--------------

SQUALL supports four determiners: ``every``, ``a``/``an``/``some``, ``no``,
and ``the``.

**Universal — every**

``every person plays`` means *for all x: if person(x) then plays(x)*::

    >>> nl = NeurolangPDL()
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice",), ("bob",)], name="person")
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice",)], name="plays")
    >>> nl.execute_squall_program("define as Active every person that plays.")
    >>> sorted(nl.solve_all()["active"].as_pandas_dataframe().iloc[:, 0].tolist())
    ['alice']

**Existential — a / an / some**

``a person plays`` asserts existence.  In a query, only items with an
associated count are returned::

    >>> nl = NeurolangPDL()
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("a",), ("b",), ("c",)], name="item")

>     >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("a", 1), ("b", 2)], name="item_count")

Author: the "_ =" is unnecessary

**Simple unary rule**::

    >>> nl = NeurolangPDL()
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice",), ("bob",), ("carol",)], name="person")
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice",), ("carol",)], name="plays")
    >>> nl.execute_squall_program("define as Active every person that plays.")
    >>> sorted(nl.solve_all()["active"].as_pandas_dataframe().iloc[:, 0].tolist())
    ['alice', 'carol']

**End-to-end execution**

The rule fires for every person that satisfies ``plays``::

    >>> nl = NeurolangPDL()
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice",), ("bob",), ("carol",)], name="person")
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("alice",), ("carol",)], name="plays")
    >>> nl.execute_squall_program("define as Active every person that plays.")
    >>> solution = nl.solve_all()
    >>> sorted(solution["active"].as_pandas_dataframe().iloc[:, 0].tolist())
    ['alice', 'carol']

6. Multi-Variable Rules and Joins
----------------------------------

N-ary rules use ``for every NOUN ; with every NOUN`` (or other prepositions)
to bind multiple variables into the head::

    >>> nl = NeurolangPDL()
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set([("a",), ("b",), ("c",)], name="item")
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set(

>     ...     [("a", 0), ("a", 1), ("b", 2), ("c", 3)], name="item_count"

Author: item_count is a weird propery name that leads to weird English phrasing. It should be refined

   # Gap Report (Section 16) for the current limitation.

.. note::

   String-literal arguments to arbitrary body predicates are not yet
   supported.  The workaround is to pre-filter the EDB in Python before
   calling ``execute_squall_program``.

**Multi-variable brain activation rule (tuple subject)**

When voxels are stored as ``(x, y, z)`` coordinate triples, the tuple
label syntax binds all three columns at once::

    >>> nl = NeurolangPDL()
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set(
    ...     [("s1",), ("s2",)], name="study"
    ... )
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set(
    ...     [(0, 1, 2), (3, 4, 5), (6, 7, 8)], name="voxel"
    ... )
    >>> _ = nl.add_tuple_set(
    ...     [("s1", 0, 1, 2), ("s2", 3, 4, 5)], name="focus_reported"
    ... )
    >>> nl.execute_squall_program(
    ...     "define as Activation every Voxel (?x; ?y; ?z) "
    ...     "that a Study ?s focus_reported."
    ... )
    >>> sorted(
    ...     nl.solve_all()["activation"]
    ...     .as_pandas_dataframe().apply(tuple, axis=1).tolist()
    ... )
    [(0, 1, 2), (3, 4, 5)]

The tuple subject ``(?x; ?y; ?z)`` binds the three coordinate columns of

> ``voxel`` and re-uses those variables in the ``focus_reported`` body

Author: ```suggestion
``voxel`` and reuses those variables in the ``focus_reported`` body
```
